In this day and age maintaining a healthy business goes hand in hand
alongside working with data.
Whether you understand it or not,
there is no denying
that data is at the foundation of any successful company
and the business entrepreneurs that are leading the way
are aware that looking deeper into data
is what will make them tower above the competition.


Let's start with the data team or the big data team.
They will want to solve a business problem.
The team will do a significant amount of work on the data that is available first.


Based on that,

the business intelligence team
will provide a business insights dashboard.

After the dashboard is ready
the data science team will use some business analytics
or data analytics tools to develop models
that could predict future outcomes.



For example,

someone who had the title of statistician 25 years ago

would've been responsible for gathering

and cleaning data sets

and applying various statistical methods to the data.



After some years; however, with the growth of data

and the radical improvement of technology,

this statistician would now be required

to extract patterns from data.

Henceforth,

a new buzzword was coined, data mining.

Similarly,

forward wind a few more years, in the same statistician

due to new mathematical and statistical models

could now perform more accurate forecasts.

And again,

another term as found its way

into an already inflated business glossary,

predictive analytics.




One HR representative may call a job position,

data analytics specialist.

When in fact,

they need a data analyst.


Another may employ a junior data scientist

when they require a business intelligence analyst.




We begin by clarifying the similarities and differences

between the terms business analytics,

data analytics,

data science,

business intelligence

and machine learning.


So, let's discuss the  differences between the terms analysis and analytics.

Due to the similarity of the words, some people believe they share the same meaning and thus use them interchangeably.

Technically, this isn't correct.

There is in fact a distinct difference between the two And the reason for one often being used instead

of the other is the lack of a transparent understanding

of both.


First, we will start with analysis.

Consider the following.

You have a huge data set containing data of various types.

Instead of tackling the entire data and running the risk

of becoming overwhelmed, you separate it into easier

to digest chunks and study them individually

and examine how they relate to other parts.

And that's analysis in a nutshell.

One important thing to remember, however,

is that you perform analysis

on things that have already happened in the past

such as using an analysis to explain

how a story ended the way it did

or how there was a decrease in sales last summer.

All this means that we do analyses to explain

how and or why something happened.

Great!



Now this leads us nicely on to the definition of analytics.

As you have probably guessed, analytics generally refers

to the future.

Instead of explaining past events,

it explores potential future ones.

Analytics is essentially the application of logical

and computational reasoning to the component parts

obtained in an analysis.


And in doing this, you are looking for patterns

and exploring what you could do with them in the future.


Here, analytics branches off into two areas,

qualitative analytics.


This is using your intuition and experience in conjunction

with the analysis to plan your next business move.

And quantitative analytics.

This is applying formulas and algorithms to numbers

you have gathered from your analysis.

Here are a couple of examples.

Say you are an owner of an online clothing store,

you are ahead of the competition

and have a great understanding of what your customers needs

and wants are.

You've performed a very detailed analysis

from women's clothing articles and feel sure

about which fashion trends to follow.

You may use this intuition to decide on which styles

of clothing to start selling.



This would be qualitative analytics, but you might not know

when to introduce the new collection.

In that case, relying on past sales data

and user experience data, you could predict

in which month it would be best to do that.

This is an example of using quantitative analytics.

Fantastic!


Now that we have cleared up the differences

between analysis and analytics,

it shouldn't be too difficult to see how terms

such as 
data analysis, data analytics, 
business analysis, and business analytics can have their unique meanings too.


So, it's time for us to create a diagram


Business case studies,

qualitative analytics,

preliminary data report,

reporting with visuals,

creating dashboards

and sales forecasting.



First though, take a moment to think

what they all have in common.

That's right, they are all part of the business world.

We'll depict this with a blue rectangle here.

Good.

Now, let's think about the following.

How many of these terms involve working with data?

If we drew another rectangle and placed the activities

for which it is essential to have data available in there,

which ones, if any, would overlap

with the business rectangle?

The answer is some.

That's because some business activities are data-driven,

while others are subjective or experience-driven.

Of course, there are disciplines that will overlap.

We will place them in the common area of the two rectangles.

So, let's see.

Which of the subfields from our list

represent a business activity involving data?

Well, you'll need data to create a preliminary report,

a visual representation of the performance

of your company for last year,

a business dashboard,

and also a forecast for the future sales of your company,

so these four labels can sit comfortably

in the overlapping area.

Great.

The other two terms, business case studies

and qualitative analytics, get left behind

as they belong only to the sphere of business.

They're not related to working with data.

Let's explore why.

Business case studies are real-world experiences

of how business people and companies succeed or fail.

You don't need a data set to learn from business cases,

thus it will remain purely in the blue rectangle.

Simple, right?

The same can be said for qualitative analytics.

As touched upon in the previous video,

this is all about using your intuition

and the knowledge of the market

to help in the future planning process.

Perfect, things are becoming clearer already.

Now would be the perfect time to introduce a timeline

to our graph.

The reason for doing that is

that some of the terms you see refer to activities

that aim to explain past behavior,

while others refer to activities used

for predicting future behavior.

Let's cut the picture roughly through the middle.

This line will represent the present.

Okay, therefore, all terms that are on the right side

of this line will regard analytics,

future planning and forecasting,

and those that are on the left of the line

will be related to the analysis of past events or data.

Perfect!

Business case studies examine events

that have already happened.

For instance, one could learn from them

in attempt to prevent making a similar mistake

in the future, right?

As a result, we could say studying business cases

is part of your analysis,

so this activity refers to the past.

Hence, it must be located on the left

of the vertical line on our graph.

We will move it up slightly to be able to contrast it

to the other business term, qualitative analytics.

This includes working with tools

that help predict future behavior,

therefore must be placed on the right.

Awesome!

In essence, what we have now is qualitative analytics

which belongs to the area of business analytics,

while learning from business case studies

is part of your business analysis.

However, this is not what many professionals would say.

In practice, analytics has become a term

comprising both analysis and analytics.

Although this goes against what we explained earlier,

please allow us to accept the industry jargon

and leave business analytics as a label for the entire set

of business processes you see on the graph.

It may look like we're confusing matters,

but things will be simpler in the long run.

All right, hopefully, we're starting to get our heads

around many of these terms

and where they fit with each other.

So, what about the rest of the terms you see on the diagram?

Well, preparing a report or a dashboard

is always a reflection of past data,

so these terms will remain untouched.

Forecasting though, is a future-oriented activity,

so we can move it to the right of the black line,

but not too much.

It must still belong on the sphere of business,

so it must be in the area where business analytics

and data intersect.

Great!

Again, it is common practice

to use the encompassing term, data analytics,

to refer to both the analyses and analytics.

While we know what the terms mean now,

to keep things simple, following the standards

of other business professionals is a good idea.

Okay, good.

Let's continue with adding another term.

The most sparkly of them all, data science.

Data science is a discipline reliant on data availability,

while business analytics does not completely rely on data.

However, data science incorporates part of data analytics,

mostly the part that uses complex mathematical,

statistical and programming tools.

Consequently, the screen rectangle,

representing data science on our diagram,

will not overlap with data analytics completely,

but it will reach a point

beyond the area of business analytics.

Okay.

Great.

Does this mean that the preliminary data report,

reporting with visuals, creating dashboards

and sales forecasting are of interest to a data scientist?

Yes, absolutely.

And now, do you think we can find an example of a discipline

that belongs to the field of data science

and is considered data analytics but not business analytics?

Well, think of the oil and gas industry

and the optimization of drilling operations,

this is a perfect fit for this subarea.

Data science can be used to improve the accuracy

of predictions based on data extracted

from various activities typical for drilling efficiency,

and that certainly isn't business analytics.

Great.

What is left is to think of something

that involves data analytics

but neither data science nor business analytics.

Can we find an example here as well?

Sure, digital signal processing would do the job.

Digital signal is used to represent data

in the form of discreet values,

which is an example of numeric data.

Therefore, data analytics can be applied to digital signal

in order to produce a higher-quality signal,

and that's what digital signal processing is all about.

Amazing!

We hope the diagram is helping you

to visualize how all the pieces fit together

because we're not done yet.

We will continue with the remaining disciplines

related to the world of business and data science

in our next video.

See you there.

-: Okay, people,

we have gone from a rather odd looking design

to what now is hopefully a comprehensive

and easy to follow model.

We say hopefully because we will be sticking

to the same method of visualization as we proceed.

Great!

We know you're eager to see what comes next.

We're going to add business intelligence to the diagram

but what is business intelligence

and how does it fit into the picture?

Remember the following: business intelligence or BI,

is the process of analyzing

and reporting historical business data.

After reports and dashboards have been prepared

they can be used to make informed strategic

and tactical business decisions

by end users, such as the general manager.

Concisely put, business intelligence aims

to explain past events using business data.

So with this information, we can work out where

the business intelligence rectangle should go.

It must go on the left of the timeline,

as it deals only with past events

and it must sit within the data science rectangle

as a subfield.

Business intelligence fits comfortably

within data science because it is the preliminary step

of predictive analytics.

It makes sense when you think about it.

First, you must analyze past data

and extract useful insights.

Using these inferences will allow you to create appropriate

models that could predict the future

of your business accurately.

Great.

Let's move on.

How should we distribute the three terms

that remain over here?

Preliminary data report is the first step

of any data analysis.

It can also be considered as data science,

so this term can stay where it is.

As with reporting and creating dashboards,

these are precisely what business intelligence is all about.

So we will neatly place these two into the orange rectangle.

Fantastic, and that's pretty much it

for business intelligence.

Now we delve into the controversial,

yet rapidly expanding field of artificial intelligence, AI,

and its subfield machine learning, ML.

The ability of machines to predict outcomes

without being explicitly programmed to do so

is regarded as machine learning.

Expanding on this, ML'S about creating and implementing

algorithms that let machines receive data

and use this data to make predictions, analyze patterns

and give recommendations on their own.

Machine learning cannot be implemented without data.

Hence, it should stay within data analytics completely.

This could be considered as a bold statement to make,

as it is debatable whether this is correct.

Some argue that data analytics and ML

are two unrelated scientific fields.

For the sake of argument, we will let the machine learning

and data analytics rectangles overlap and in a moment

we will exemplify some areas that could be considered parts

of both disciplines.

Moreover, ML should expand slightly

to the left of the vertical line.

The reason for that is the increasing tendency

towards applying machine learning tools

to the context of business intelligence.

Fantastic!

You remember we mentioned artificial intelligence right?

By definition, it is about simulating human knowledge

and decision making with computers.

It is quite a general term

that can have a rather philosophical interpretation.

We, as humans, have only managed to reach AI

through machine learning,

the discipline we just talked about,

and as data scientists, we are interested in how tools

from machine learning can help us improve

the accuracy of our estimations.

AI is beyond our expertise.

We have mentioned it just to avoid the confusion

of where it stands relative to the other fields of interest.

All right.

Let's provide a few examples.

The demand for accurate, realtime dashboards

open space for machine learning applications.

Machine learning software can pull data

from third party companies, such as Facebook or Shopify,

detect new patterns from their data and thus,

suggest realtime recommendations and insights

to managers and other decision makers.

This is a great way to improve the performance

of your business as soon as there's a chance to do so.

In general, there is a lot

of potential for development in this field.

Turning to the other side of the vertical line,

we can say client retention

and acquisition are two typical business activities

where machine learning is involved.

It helps develop models that predict

what a client's next purchase would be.

For example, since we could say data analytics

and data science are applied in client retention

and acquisition as well,

we can leave this term right over here.

Okay!

ML can be applied to fraud prevention as another example.

We can feed a machine learning algorithm

with prior fraudulent activity data.

It will find patterns

which the human brain is incapable of seeing.

Having a model which can detect such transactions

or operations in real time has helped the financial system

prevent a huge amount of fraudulent activity.

These examples are probably not the first

that would spring to mind when talking AI and ML.

Usually, speech and image recognition

are among the most popular examples,

as they are already being implemented in products like Siri,

Cortana, Google's assistant and more impressively,

self-driving cars.

Naturally, these two examples are outside

the business context and it is debatable

whether they could be placed under the umbrella

of data science,

data analytics,

both

or neither.

As it is a hot topic for discussion right now,

we think they are worth mentioning.

However, to avoid further confusion and disputes,

let's take speech and image recognition out of the picture.

Finally, an example that is considered

artificial intelligence but not machine learning

is symbolic reasoning.

It is based on the high-level human readable representations

of problems and logic.

It was once a trend in the past,

when people were trying to create human-like intelligence.

Today though, machine learning is the only form

of general artificial intelligence that is being applied

and symbolic AI is rarely encountered, let alone practiced.

All right, so along with speech and image recognition

we can remove symbolic AI from the equation also.

This will leave us with only what we are interested in.

Nice!

Now, we would like to mention a term that has invaded

almost all business and data science glossaries,

advanced analytics.

It is rather a marketing term, coming from people

who want to say that the type of analytics

they are dealing with is not easy to handle.

This is a subjective way of looking at it.

Often intimidating-sounding terms are used

to discourage learning and create prestige.

However, we are here to attempt to clarify

the terms within analytics and advanced analytics

is technically a term that exists.

So we will collectively group all areas of analytics

under advanced analytics, with the idea that any part

of analytics can seem advanced at first,

but that no part is exclusively

or permanently within this category.

Perfect!

Remember that all areas intertwine

and what we show here is not a strict representation

of commonly accepted meanings and definitions.

It is all matter of interpretation

and this graph is our vision of data science.

The locations of some of the components

in the diagram are somewhat controversial.

However, we believe this is a very comprehensive depiction

of what these disciplines are about and how they overlap.

Before we wrap up, the position and the size

of the rectangles show conceptual similarities

and differences, not complexity.

All right, great!

Finally, let's refer to our infographic.

You won't need all fields from the diagram

because we will be concentrating

on data science and its application in business.

Therefore, this is the rectangle

that we will be working on next.

The infographic I am talking about looks like this.

It may look a little complicated at first,

but if you follow us through the next videos

we will explain it step by step.

Thank you for watching.