Another major use of hashing is in digital signatures. So just like their counterparts, digital

signatures provide authenticity of a message, which means that if someone has digitally signed a document

or data, then they are giving the assurance that that data or file is, in fact, coming from them.

Let's see how digital signatures actually work and how they leverage hashing.

So there is a source with the file, what the source does is that it calculates the hash of the file

and then the source signs that hash using his private key.

And then this signed hash is stored along with the file.

Now, please note that this hash is not visible as plaintext.

It has been encrypted or signed with the private key of the user.

And we call it a digital signature because only the source has access to the private key and nobody

else in the world can encrypt the data using source's

private key.

So now the user downloads the file, as well as the signed hash, and the user recalculates the hash of the

downloaded file independently. Now the user also has access to the public key of the source, and he

decrypts the signed hash using the public key.

So the only way this hash could be decrypted was if this was signed by the private key of the source.

And that's why we use the public key to decrypt it.

And it worked.

So this is the basic principle of public cryptography.

Anything which is encrypted with private key can only be decrypted with the public key and vice versa.

So now the user has obtained the unencrypted or the plain text hash and he has also recalculated the

hash on his own.

So the last step, the user compares the two hashes and if the two match, then it means the digital

signature is valid and this file actually came from the sender.

However, if there is any difference, then this means either the file has changed or somebody has tried

to modify the contents of the signed hash.

In either case, the authenticity is violated and we can be sure, that this was encrypted by the source

because only private key can be used to encrypt data which is subsequently decrypted by the public.

So just like their counterparts, digital signatures provide authenticity.

What it means is that if someone digitally signed a document or data, then they are giving assurance

that this data or this file is in fact coming from them.

A digital signature is always done using the private key and the corresponding public key is distributed

to thousands of users.

So we are again leveraging the concepts of public key cryptography in which you sign using your private

key or you encrypt using your private key, and then you distribute it publicly to the public at large

and they can decrypt your message using your public key.

Confidentiality can additionally be added by encrypting the entire file, using the private key in addition

to the hash.



However, in some instances, MD5 five has been shown to suffer from collisions.




This concludes our lecture.

I'll see you in the next one.